Table of contents
Exit editor mode
Ask Learn
Ask Learn
Reading mode
Table of contents
Read in English
Add
Add to plan
Edit
Share via
Facebook
x.com
LinkedIn
Email
Copy Markdown
Print
Note
Access to this page requires authorization. You can try
signing in
or
changing directories
.
Access to this page requires authorization. You can try
changing directories
.
What is Azure Load Balancer?
Feedback
Summarize this article for me
Important
On September 30, 2025, Basic Load Balancer was retired. For more information, see the
official announcement
. If you are currently using Basic Load Balancer, make sure to upgrade to Standard Load Balancer as soon as possible. For guidance on upgrading, visit
Upgrading from Basic Load Balancer - Guidance
.
Azure Load Balancer is a cloud service that distributes incoming network traffic across backend virtual machines (VMs) or virtual machine scale sets (VMSS). This article explains Azure Load Balancer's key features, architecture, and scenarios, helping you decide if it fits your organization's load balancing needs for scalable, highly available workloads.
Load balancing
refers to efficiently distributing incoming network traffic across a group of backend virtual machines (VMs) or virtual machine scale sets (VMSS).
Note
Azure Load Balancer is one of the services that make up the Load Balancing and Content Delivery category in Azure. Other services in this category include
Azure Front Door
and
Azure Application Gateway
. Each service has its own unique features and use cases. For more information on this service category, see
Load Balancing and Content Delivery
.
Load balancer overview
Azure Load Balancer operates at layer 4 of the Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) model. It's the single point of contact for clients. The service distributes inbound flows that arrive at the load balancer's frontend to backend pool instances. These flows are distributed according to configured load-balancing rules and health probes. The backend pool instances can be Azure virtual machines (VMs) or virtual machine scale sets.
A
public load balancer
can provide both inbound and outbound connectivity for the VMs inside your virtual network. For inbound traffic scenarios, Azure Load Balancer can load balance internet traffic to your VMs. For outbound traffic scenarios, the service can translate the VMs' private IP addresses to public IP addresses for any outbound connections that originate from your VMs.
Alternatively, an
internal (or private) load balancer
are used to load balance traffic inside a virtual network. With internal load balancer, you can provide inbound connectivity to your VMs in private network connectivity scenarios, such as accessing a load balancer frontend from an on-premises network in a hybrid scenario.
For more information on the service's individual components, see
Azure Load Balancer components
.
Azure Load Balancer has three stock-keeping units (SKUs) - Basic, Standard, and Gateway. Each SKU is catered towards a specific scenario and has differences in scale, features, and pricing. For more information, see
Azure Load Balancer SKUs
.
Why use Azure Load Balancer
With Azure Load Balancer, you can scale your applications and create highly available services. The service supports both inbound and outbound scenarios, provides low latency and high throughput, and scales up to millions of flows for all TCP and UDP applications.
Core capabilities
Azure Load Balancer provides:
High availability
: Distribute resources
within
and
across
availability zones
Scalability
: Handle millions of flows for TCP and UDP applications
Low latency
: Use pass-through load balancing for ultralow latency
Flexibility
: Support for
multiple ports, multiple IP addresses, or both
Health monitoring
: Use
health probes
to ensure traffic is only sent to healthy instances
Traffic distribution scenarios
Load balance
internal
and
external
traffic to Azure virtual machines
Configure
outbound connectivity
for Azure virtual machines
Load balance TCP and UDP flow on all ports simultaneously using
high-availability ports
Enable
port forwarding
to access virtual machines by public IP address and port
Advanced features
IPv6 support
: Enable
load balancing of IPv6
traffic
Cross-region mobility
: Move
internal
and
external
load balancer resources across Azure regions
Gateway load balancer integration
: Chain Standard Load Balancer and
Gateway Load Balancer
Global load balancing integration
: Distribute traffic
across multiple Azure regions
for global applications
Admin State
:
Override health probe behavior
for maintenance and operational management
Monitoring and insights
Comprehensive metrics
: Use multidimensional metrics through
Azure Monitor
Pre-built dashboards
: Access
Insights for Azure Load Balancer
with useful visualizations
Diagnostics
: Review
Standard load balancer diagnostics
for performance insights
Health Event Logs
: Monitor load balancer
health events
and status changes for proactive management
Load Balancer health status
: Gain deeper insights into the health of your load balancer through
health status
monitoring
Security features
Azure Load Balancer implements security through multiple layers:
Zero Trust security model
Standard Load Balancer
is built on the Zero Trust network security model
Part of your virtual network, which is private and isolated by default
Network access controls
Standard load balancers and public IP addresses are
closed to inbound connections by default
Network Security Groups (NSGs)
must explicitly permit allowed traffic
Traffic is blocked if no NSG exists on a subnet or NIC
Data protection
Azure Load Balancer
doesn't store customer data
All traffic processing happens in real-time without data persistence
Important
Basic Load Balancer is open to the internet by default and will be retired on September 30, 2025. Migrate to Standard Load Balancer for enhanced security.
To learn about NSGs and how to apply them to your scenario, see
Network security groups
.
Pricing and SLA
For
Standard Load Balancer
pricing information, see
Load Balancer pricing
. For service-level agreements (SLAs), see the
Microsoft licensing information for online services
.
Basic Load Balancer is offered at no charge and has no SLA. It was retired on September 30, 2025.
What's new?
Subscribe to the RSS feed and view the latest Azure Load Balancer updates on the
Azure Updates
page.
Related content
Create a public load balancer
Azure Load Balancer components
Feedback
Was this page helpful?
Yes
No
No
Need help with this topic?
Want to try using Ask Learn to clarify or guide you through this topic?
Ask Learn
Ask Learn
Suggest a fix?
Additional resources
Last updated on
2025-07-16