Table of contents
Exit editor mode
Ask Learn
Ask Learn
Reading mode
Table of contents
Read in English
Add
Add to plan
Edit
Share via
Facebook
x.com
LinkedIn
Email
Copy Markdown
Print
Note
Access to this page requires authorization. You can try
signing in
or
changing directories
.
Access to this page requires authorization. You can try
changing directories
.
What is Azure Kubernetes Service (AKS)?
Feedback
Summarize this article for me
Azure Kubernetes Service (AKS) is a managed Kubernetes service that you can use to deploy and manage containerized applications. You need minimal container orchestration expertise to use AKS. AKS reduces the complexity and operational overhead of managing Kubernetes by offloading much of that responsibility to Azure. AKS is an ideal platform for deploying and managing containerized applications that require high availability, scalability, and portability, and for deploying applications to multiple regions, using open-source tools, and integrating with existing DevOps tools.
This article is intended for platform administrators or developers who are looking for a scalable, automated, managed Kubernetes solution.
Overview of AKS
AKS reduces the complexity and operational overhead of managing Kubernetes by shifting that responsibility to Azure. When you create an AKS cluster, Azure automatically creates and configures a control plane for you at no cost. The Azure platform manages the AKS control plane, which is responsible for the Kubernetes objects and worker nodes that you deploy to run your applications. Azure takes care of critical operations like health monitoring and maintenance, and you only pay for the AKS nodes that run your applications.
Note
AKS is
CNCF-certified
and is compliant with SOC, ISO, PCI DSS, and HIPAA. For more information, see the
Microsoft Azure compliance overview
.
Container solutions in Azure
Azure offers a range of container solutions designed to accommodate various workloads, architectures, and business needs.
Container solution
Resource type
Azure Kubernetes Service
Managed Kubernetes
Azure Red Hat OpenShift
Managed Kubernetes
Azure Arc-enabled Kubernetes
Unmanaged Kubernetes
Azure Container Instances
Managed Docker container instance
Azure Container Apps
Managed Kubernetes
For more information comparing the various solutions, see the following resources:
Comparing the service models of Azure container solutions
Comparing Azure compute service options
When to use AKS
The following list describes some common use cases for AKS:
Lift and shift to containers with AKS
: Migrate existing applications to containers and run them in a fully managed Kubernetes environment.
Microservices with AKS
: Simplify the deployment and management of microservices-based applications with streamlined horizontal scaling, self-healing, load balancing, and secret management.
Secure DevOps for AKS
: Efficiently balance speed and security by implementing secure DevOps with Kubernetes.
Bursting from AKS with ACI
: Use virtual nodes to provision pods inside ACI that start in seconds and scale to meet demand.
Machine learning model training with AKS
: Train models using large datasets with familiar tools, such as TensorFlow and Kubeflow.
Data streaming with AKS
: Ingest and process real-time data streams with millions of data points collected via sensors, and perform fast analyses and computations to develop insights into complex scenarios.
Using Windows containers on AKS
: Run Windows Server containers on AKS to modernize your Windows applications and infrastructure.
Tip
If you want a fully managed experience with production-ready defaults, built-in security, and a pod readiness SLA that guarantees 99.9% of qualifying pods are ready within 5 minutes during scale-ups, consider
AKS Automatic
.
Features of AKS
The following table lists some of the key features of AKS:
Feature
Description
Identity and security management
• Enforce
regulatory compliance controls using Azure Policy
with built-in guardrails and internet security benchmarks.
• Integrate with
Kubernetes RBAC
to limit access to cluster resources.
• Use
Microsoft Entra ID
to set up Kubernetes access based on existing identity and group membership.
Logging and monitoring
• Integrate with
Container Insights
, a feature in Azure Monitor, to monitor the health and performance of your clusters and containerized applications.
• Set up
Advanced Container Networking Services
to collect and visualize network traffic data from your clusters.
Streamlined deployments
• Use prebuilt cluster configurations for Kubernetes with
smart defaults
.
• Autoscale your applications using the
Kubernetes Event Driven Autoscaler (KEDA)
.
• Use
Draft for AKS
to ready source code and prepare your applications for production.
Clusters and nodes
• Connect storage to nodes and pods, upgrade cluster components, and use GPUs.
• Create clusters that run multiple node pools to support mixed operating systems and Windows Server containers.
• Configure automatic scaling using the
cluster autoscaler
and
horizontal pod autoscaler
.
• Deploy clusters with
confidential computing nodes
to allow containers to run in a hardware-based trusted execution environment.
Storage volume support
• Mount static or dynamic storage volumes for persistent data.
• Use
Azure Container Storage
for fully managed, cloud-based volume management and orchestration of block storage. Azure Container Storage integrates with Kubernetes, allowing dynamic and automatic provisioning of persistent volumes.
• Use
Azure Disks
CSI driver for single pod access and
Azure Files
CSI driver for multiple, concurrent pod access.
• Use
Azure NetApp Files
for high-performance, high-throughput, and low-latency file shares.
Networking
• Leverage our
networking options
for your needs.
•
Bring your own Container Network Interface (CNI)
to use a third-party CNI plugin.
• Easily access applications deployed to your clusters using the
application routing add-on with nginx
.
Development tooling integration
• Develop on AKS with
Helm
.
• Install the
Kubernetes extension for Visual Studio Code
to manage your workloads.
• Leverage the features of Istio with the
Istio-based service mesh add-on
.
Get started with AKS
Get started with AKS using the following resources:
Learn the
core Kubernetes concepts for AKS
.
Evaluate application deployment on AKS with our
AKS tutorial series
.
Review the
Azure Well-Architected Framework for AKS
to learn how to design and operate reliable, secure, efficient, and cost-effective applications on AKS.
Plan your design and operations
for AKS using our reference architectures.
Explore
configuration options and recommended best practices for cost optimization
on AKS.
Feedback
Was this page helpful?
Yes
No
No
Need help with this topic?
Want to try using Ask Learn to clarify or guide you through this topic?
Ask Learn
Ask Learn
Suggest a fix?
Additional resources
Last updated on
2025-06-09